University of Konstanz Summer Semester 2023
Department Mathematics and Statistics
Jun-Prof. Dr. B. Azmi
M. Kartmann
Optimization IV - PDE-constrained Optimization
Exercise Sheet 2
Submission Deadline: May 10th00:00h
Exercise 1. (10 points)
In this exercise we will look into discretization by Galerkin projection. Galerkin projections are used as an
analytical to prove existence of weak solutions for parabolic PDEs (see the corresponding chapter in the lecture
notes), but also to derive finite element discretizations or projection-based reduced-order models.
We consider here the case of a linear coercive elliptic PDE: find y∈Vsuch that
a(y, v) =l(v)∀v∈V. (1)
with a continuous, coerive bilinear form aon some separable Hilbert space Vand a continuous linear form
l. Choosing a finite-dimensional subspace Vh= span( ϕ1, . . . , ϕ n)⊂Vwe can define the Galerkin projection
yh∈Vhofyas the solution of the following problem: find yh=Pn
i=1ϕiyi∈Vh
a(yh, v) =l(v)∀v∈Vh. (2)
1. The solution yhcan be identified with its DoF (degrees of freedom) vector y∈Rn. Show that an
implementable form of (2) is given as
Ay=l. (3)
for arrays A∈Rn×nandl∈Rn. Why is this linear system uniquely solvable?
2. Consider now the special case V=H1(Ω) for a Lipschitz domain Ω ⊂R2. Find discrete expressions for
•∥yh∥L2(Ω);
•⟨yh, ph⟩H1(Ω)for some ph∈Vh:
•R
˜Ωyh(x) dx for some ˜Ω⊂Ω.
Interpret these expressions as (bi-)linear forms and apply the same reasoning as o´ ın the first part.
Exercise 2. (10 points)
In this exercise we will solve a linear-quadratic optimal control problem. Consider the domain Ω = [0 ,1]2and
the problem
min
y∈H1
0(Ω),
u∈L2(Ω)1
2Z
Ω(y−yd)2dx +σ
2Z
Ωu2dx (4)
s.t.Z
Ω∇y· ∇vdx =Z
Ωuvdx∀v∈H1
0(Ω) (5)
foryd∈L2(Ω). Since we do not know anything about optimization in function spaces so far, we will first
discretize the problem and the apply methods from finite-dimensional optimization to solve the discrete version.
This is called the first-discretize-then-optimize (DBO) approach.
a) Discretizing (4)-(5) with the Galerkin approach by choosing finite dimensional subspaces Vh⊂H1
0(Ω)
andUh⊂L2(Ω) that are spanned by a finite number of basis functions yields a finite dimensional
(dim(Vh) +dim(Uh)) linear-quadratic optimization problem. State the form of this optimization problem
depending on the corresponding matrices for the L2(Ω) and H1
0(Ω)-products.
b) Derive the first order optimality conditions for the finite dimensional optimization problem and show that
there is a unique solution.1
c) Use FeniCS to assemble the (bi-)linear forms in the function space problem, giving you the matrices for
the finite dimensional problem. Do not forget to clear the dirichlet dofs in the matrices and the vectors.
1This is a problem in finite dimension, you may of course use results from prior Optimization classes. You may also use the
formal Lagrange technique.
1

d) Let Sbe the solution operator to the constraint (5). Generate the targets yd=S(ud) for
•ud≡1;
•ud(x1, x2) = sin(2 πx1) cos(2 πx2).
e) Set up the first order optimality conditions of the finite dimensional problem using the matrices2that you
obtained in the previous step. Compute and visualize the optimal states and controls to the discretized
optimization problem with yd=S(ud) for ud≡1 and ud(x1, x2) = sin(2 πx1) cos(2 πx2) for
σ∈ {10,1,10−1,10−2,10−3,10−4,10−5}.
What do you observe?
2Having the matrices in sparse format saves some amount of time. It is not mandatory for the exercise, but feel free to test it!
2